---
title: Fassinheuristic
source: fassinheuristic.pdf
date: '2026-07-15'
ocr: marker/surya (force_ocr)
lang: es
---

## Introduction

The Heuristic of Crises: Reclaiming Critical Voices

## DIDIER FASSIN AND AXEL HONNETH

re live in a time of crises. Or rather, we live in a time when our dominant representation of the world is one of crises. Think of  $% \left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{ 1\right\} =\left\{$ the health crisis caused by the novel coronavirus pandemic and the social and economic crisis resulting from it, the environmental crisis related to global warming and its consequences, the refugee crises recently experienced in Europe but also South Asia, the humanitarian crises affecting places torn by civil wars from Syria and Afghanistan to Yemen and Sudan, and the political crises that threaten democratic processes in Brazil and Egypt as well as Hungary and Israel, among others. Some of these crises emerge from specific events that reveal broader issues, such as the announcement of the limitation of cash withdrawal in Argentina, the suicide of a street vendor in Tunisia, the rape of a female student in India, the killing of a black man by the police in the United States, the proposal of a bill extending extradition agreements in Hong Kong, the accidental explosion of stored chemical products in Lebanon, or the yellow vests movement after an increase in gas taxes in France. Others emerge less dramatically from gradual and profound transformations in gender relations, sexual models, racial belonging, cultural identity, the legitimacy of politics, the regulation of finance, the division of labor, the distribution of resources, the status of knowledge, the foundations of morality, and more. The language of crisis to account for such phenomena is ubiquitous.

However, with its extraordinary heterogeneity, which evokes Borges's humorously fictitious taxonomy of the animal kingdom in his essay "The Analytical Language of John Wilkins," this catalogue seems to challenge any theoretical appraisal of what crises are and what they express. In fact, it would even appear

senseless if it did not precisely call our attention to the paradoxical normalization of the language of crisis—paradoxical because a crisis is supposed to be a rupture in the normal order of things. How could it therefore be normalized to the point of becoming a descriptor of so many different situations? How could crises be the new norm? There is an intellectual dilemma here. On the one hand, crises cannot be taken for granted. Their self-evidence must be questioned. The inflation of the term and of the state of affairs it pertains to invites us to critically examine what is at stake in the very designation as such of social phenomena. Which facts are deemed crises, and which ones are not? Who has the authority to declare that a given situation is a crisis, and who does not? What benefits are gained and what agendas are hidden in such interpretation? These are crucial questions to be formulated. On the other hand, crises cannot be dismissed as purely social or mental constructions. They often manifest serious issues, even if these issues need to be reviewed. The gravity of the circumstances to which they refer most of the time requires a critical scrutiny of what they signal. Which criteria are used to decide on a crisis? What practical consequences derive from this decision? What meaning can be attributed to such reading of events? Again, these interrogations must be answered. In sum, we have to navigate between the two classic philosophical pitfalls of nominalism and realism.

To escape this predicament, we have, in this collective volume, reoriented the habitual approaches to crises. We do not ask what they are and what they denote from an outsider's perspective, but instead what insiders see in situations designated as crises, how they apprehend them, how they participate in them, and how they respond to them. We ask what sort of critique people produce in critical situations—and these people can be workers, peasants, students, refugees, technocrats, intellectuals, scientists, or the general public. This epistemological shift displaces the analysis from the diagnosis of crises, on which most studies focus, either to validate or to refute their existence, to what we can call a heuristic of crises. We try to understand what sort of knowledge is generated through the assessment of, and reaction to, specific critical situations by those involved. Indeed, a crisis has often two complementary effects. First, it can reveal to the people concerned some structures and conditions of society that until then were not perceived or not articulated, although it should be emphasized that, in the contexts of domination, often this revelation is not one for those affected, but instead for the rest of society, which had hitherto been blind to these circumstances. Second, it allows these people to resignify and reevaluate those now accessible structures and conditions, and their relations to them, as the appropriation of these new social terms then serves to initiate political change. The world

in the aftermath of the crisis, and frequently even in the course of it, is therefore different not only because of the objective transformations that it brings about, but also—and this is what interests us the most—because of the subjective modifications emanating from the critical examination of the critical situation. In this sense, we can say that a crisis is a co-production involving multiple social agencies. It is not the case that crises merely happen and that people subsequently act in response. The way people interpret crises-exaggerate, minimize, or deny them and cope with, protest against, or resolve them—gives shape to what these crises come to be, and in return, dialectically, these crises affect the fate of those involved. The contributions to the present volume thus concur in the intent to study how situations lived as critical are simultaneously socially produced and socially productive.

To be sure, none of us presupposes that a crisis is simply a given, even if it almost always has some actual grounds. Whether a certain irregularity or disturbance within social life is perceived as a crisis depends on how the various concerned groups analyze the situation and judge its consequences for the entire society, which can be local, national, or global, often with discordant or even conflicting views. Therefore, it is one effect of the interpretative efforts made either within social movements, by affected individuals, or through intellectual interventions—to mention the agencies involved in our volume—to contest the signification of a historical moment as a crisis, or on the contrary, to successfully impose its representation as such. Both possibilities open up various options for uncovering veiled conditions, although crises can also conceal problems and divert public attention from significant issues. Crises can indeed be interpreted in opposite ways, since what some regard as a crisis can correspond to normal life for others, while what is perceived as normal by some may appear to be a devastating experience for others.

Such a critique thus fosters new forms of narratives, theories, and worldviews. But it also creates new emotional, sensorial, and physical experiences. Remarkably, it is inscribed in multiple temporalities, or better said, it plays with the various dimensions of time. A crisis is unquestionably anchored in the present, with the evident risk of presentism, and even in the most immediate present it creates a sense of urgency, with the reduction of complex configurations necessitating structural responses to simple situations calling for emergency reactions. But the past is also mobilized, as the critical situation awakens buried memories, reveals obscured continuities, or reminds people that things could have been different from what they actually are. And the future is always at stake, whether it is darkened by dystopic imaginaries or enlightened by bright horizons of expectation.

## 

Although the present is overwhelming in such situations, both past and future carry the potentiality of revolutionary alternatives, or at least an awareness of other possible courses of action. Crises thus have various semantic, cognitive, affective, physical, and temporal layers, which renders their reading complex and yet never complete.

Each chapter of the book attempts to account for this complexity and incompleteness in a specific context, with case studies covering crises in Africa, Asia, Oceania, the Middle East, North and Latin America, and Europe, and bringing together anthropologists, sociologists, historians, economists, philosophers, and political scientists. These case studies endeavor to reclaim the voices of those who, collectively or individually, whether directly or indirectly involved, as intellectual figures or ordinary citizens, respond to situations regarded as crises.

The first part focuses on the role of social movements in critical situations. In her study of shop stewards', miners', and builders' protests in Britain from 1918 to 1921, Clara Mattei explores an almost forgotten and today hardly imaginable episode when workers challenged capitalism, as the First World War had revealed the weaknesses of laissez faire and the need for state intervention, and requested a complete reform of the system of production and remuneration through the creation of workshop committees, the tentative nationalization of mines, and the development of building guilds, in each case with mixed final outcomes. In a more dramatic context, after the massacre at the peaceful sit-in on Tiananmen Square by the Chinese military in 1989, several groups were formed to preserve the memory of these events, endorse their political legacy, and claim justice for their victims, four of them being the object of the research carried out by Rowena Xiaoqing He, who explains through the concept of Confucian dissent that both the initial mobilization and the groups subsequently constituted were loyal to the regime, which they attempted to change from within, at the cost of harsh punishment and sometimes of the loss of their life, as in the case of the Nobel laureate Liu Xiaobo. In his inquiry into the 2011 uprising of Chilean students for free public education, Rodrigo Cordero shows that this movement, which started in response to the belated payment of the meager monthly stipend and the selling of a small university to an investment fund, progressively discovered that the default on the students' debts and the marketization of their education were inherited from a constitution voted under the dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet and still not replaced more than a decade after its fall, which led the protesters to question the very existence of democracy. Following the eleven-year struggle

of laid-off workers of Ssangyong Motors from 2009 on, as the company changes hands from a South Korean corporation to a Chinese venture capital and later to an Indian conglomerate, Hae Yeon Choo delves into the cynical logics of companies that deal with their workers as disposable, not expressing compassion about the thirty suicides related to the dismissals and even relying on the state's repressive apparatus to subdue those on strike, but she also describes the clearheaded and creative responses of workers and unions to their ordeal. It is the activism of migrants and refugees in Europe during the summer of 2015, when many of them fleeing war, persecution, and poverty were blocked in Hungary before they could continue their journey to Germany, that Robin Celikates addresses, discussing the way in which they were not only the victims of the closure of borders by governments but also the producers of a critical situation that called for a solution. Crisis of capitalism in Britain, of democracy in the United States, of the regime in China, of education in Chile, of labor in South Korea, of hospitality in Europe: all these crises are unveiled and even precipitated by social movements, which, through their critique in acts, propose, more or less explicitly, with more or less success, alternatives to failed and flawed systems that are not living up to their supposed norms and values.

The second part turns to intellectual engagements, moving from collectives to individuals, including famous authors and hardly known characters, suggesting unexpected parallels between figures distant in time or space and discussing not only progressive voices but also reactionary ones. Boldly bringing together W. E. B. Du Bois and Sayyid Qutb, two contemporaneous thinkers never made to converse, Murad Idris analyzes how, from their distinct perspectives, the African American sociologist of race and the Egyptian Islamist theorist of jihad converge in their view that peace is conceived of in such a way that its racialized and colonial structure is paradoxically facilitating the potentiality of war, whether this war is one of oppression and conquest or of revolt and emancipation, whether it is within national boundaries or exported remotely in Africa or Korea. No less original is the parallel imagined between two authors who inhabit the same country but in different periods, Henry David Thoreau and Ta-Nehisi Coates, to whom Dieter Thomä dedicates his reflection, arguing that despite their many dissimilarities, they share a common use of the first person to express their critique of society and speak to their readers, which situates them neither as detached nor as concerned critics, in other words, neither as they nor as we, but as interfering ones, in other words I, being simultaneously observers of and participants in the world. Another unusual combination is proposed by Gregor Dobler, in this case with a unity of time and space, between an evangelist

preacher, Cleophas Johannes, and an Anglican priest, Theophilus Hamutumbangela, both living in the 1950s in what is today Namibia, the former having written a letter to the South African administrator to call for justice after the murder of his brother by two white farmers, the latter being the author of a petition to the United Nations for the latter protesting against rampant apartheid under the increasing influence of South Africa, both initiatives representing the simultaneous emergence of the recognition of a crisis and the possibility of a critique. Although atypical figures of intellectuals, technocrats can also play a role in the uncovering and interpretations of critical situations, as Aldo Marchesi demonstrates through the example of Juan Pablo Terra, an Uruguayan expert in developmentalism who, as his country faced more or less similar economic difficulties, growing inequalities, and housing problems, analyzed the crisis in structural terms calling for long-term transformations in 1955 and with a pragmatic approach implying contingent solutions in 1982, thus showing the work of the ideological context in distinct historical moments. In Anne McNevin's contribution, an improbable intellectual engagement is the case of Behrouz Boochani, a Kurdish-Iranian journalist who had sought refuge in Australia in 2013 but ended up being detained for six years in the infamous Manus Island Prison, his engagement being improbable because he was only able to recount and denounce his experience via fragments composed on a mobile phone and clandestinely sent abroad to a friend, but was eager to avoid an essentialization of the violence endured and, instead, to connect this experience with the colonial past and xenophobic present of the country, therefore politicizing the asylum crisis. However different they are, these intellectual figures do not simply use critique to expose a crisis that is already there; they contribute to their production, their depiction, and their interpretation.

The third part deals with the responses given to crises by *affected communities*, at a collective or an individual level, but neither formally organized nor intellectually defined. The fate of migrants and refugees across the world, deemed undocumented aliens, epitomizes the situation of those concerned by crises, but, on the basis of her research at the southern border of the United States since the election of Donald Trump in 2016, Denise Brennan focuses rather on those who exercise their discretionary power over these populations to control them via policing and punishing, which she contrasts with those in the local communities who try to protect and assist these illegal foreigners. Such care is not without ambiguity, however, as Greta Wagner shows in her study of the reception of migrants and refugees after 2015 in Germany, which has been by far the most hospitable country of the Western world in recent years: while compassion tends

to get citizens closer to the exiles in their neighborhood, it is often mixed with representations of them as pure victims, with prejudices about their way of living, and even with resentment regarding the insufficient expression of their gratitude, which jointly constitute obstacles to the building of an equal relationship. It is a very different scenario that Daniel Aldana Cohen and David Bond offer in their study of the reaction to hurricanes in the state of New York and the island of St. Croix by experts, volunteers, and ordinary citizens who share their views about the catastrophes foretold, yet which were ignored by the authorities and iteratively caused severe damage to the population. Another environmental issue, chemical contamination, is at stake in David Bond's research in Vermont, and he gives an account of the difficult struggle of the people exposed in their immediate environment to fluorosurfactants known for their cancerogenic effects and confronted by the resistance of industry companies as well as state officials who, after having negated the pathologic effects of their products, try to elude the fact that toxicity is becoming not only increasingly ubiquitous but also unequally distributed. However, affected people can be neither reactive nor proactive but retreat as a silent mode of protest, as Anne-Claire Defossez analyzes in the French case, with an increasing number of individuals, culminating at the 2017 presidential and legislative elections, who do not seem concerned by the political processes because they do not register on the electoral rolls or they abstain from voting, especially among the working class, which also disappears from almost all political bodies, either local or national, as if their disinvestment from the supposed democratic life signifies their refusal of a system that does not represent them anymore. Migrant and refugee crisis, environmental crisis, and representational crisis show in various ways the involvement of critique beyond the usual framework of social movements and engaged intellectuals—among common people.

The fourth and last part explores the *reflexive perspectives* from which human and social scientists delve into the comprehension of critical responses to crises. For Hector Amaya, the challenge is to try to apprehend the rationalities underlying violent and racist acts of white supremacists and alt-right nationalists, which he studies through the 2017 far-right rally in Charlottesville during which a young woman was killed and the 2019 mosque shooting in Christchurch that resulted in the deaths of fifty-one people. As regards Munira Khayyat, the question is that of the involvement of the professor with her students in the dual context of the aborted Egyptian January Revolution from 2011 on and of the Lebanese so-called October Revolution in 2019, as the classroom becomes a refuge from repression in the first case and as the street becomes an avatar of the classroom in the second

one. Also based on his own experience in the 1960s and 1970s in the United States as supporter of and activist in social movements for civil rights and against the Vietnam War, but expanding his analysis to include earlier workers' protests, Michael Walzer draws a comparison of the dynamics within political mobilizations depending on whether people are directly affected or remotely engaged, and reflects on the differences in political commitments between the oppressed and their sympathizers as well as between the activists and the militants. Reflecting on other collective struggles, those for better labor conditions, Axel Honneth examines the withdrawal of workers at the very moment when these conditions have worsened, which could suggest that either they have become more passive or that their defiance has become less visible, an alternative that leads to a reconsideration of what can be interpreted as resistance and to a search for alternative modes of opposing the system, positively by promoting local cultures of respect or negatively by developing cultures of misbehavior, in both cases critiquing contemporary capitalism. In a final essay, Didier Fassin proposes to deem conspiracy theories deviant forms of critique of official knowledge and legitimate authority that generate a dual crisis of veridiction and authority, and he insists that they therefore deserve particular attention rather than mockery or denunciation, in order to apprehend their complex meanings and ambiguous signals.

Taken together, the twenty contributions of this volume thus offer a geography of the social production of crises on a global scale. Although the historical and national contexts are extremely different and the issues are in each case specific, all converge to demonstrate the intricacy between crisis and critique. Crises frequently stem from critique, and critique generally emerges from crises. Whether they are organized in groups or unions, are defined as intellectuals or activists, or are simply individuals unsatisfied with a certain state of the world, people both produce and respond to critical situations with the critical instruments they have at hand. In a time when crises are so often naturalized and critique is so often contested, it might make sense to remember how much they are intimately connected.