---
title: Sansi 2020 introduction anthropology and curation through the looking glass
source: Sansi_2020_Introduction_Anthropology_and_curation_through_the_looking_glass.pdf
date: '2026-07-15'
ocr: marker/surya (force_ocr)
lang: es
---

# Introduction: anthropology and curation through the looking glass

#### Roger Sansi

More than two decades ago, Hal Foster's seminal essay 'The Artist as Ethnographer' opened a wide-ranging discussion on the relations between contemporary art and anthropology (Foster 1995; Gell 1996; Marcus 2010; Sansi 2015; Schneider and Wright 2005, 2010, 2013). However, the question of 'The Anthropologist as Curator/the curator as anthropologist' has not received the same attention. There is an enormous literature on the anthropology of museums and collections (Clifford 1997; Edwards, Gosden and Phillips 2006, Karp and Levine 1991; Karp and Kratz 2007; Kirshenblatt-Gimblett 1998; Lonetree 2012; Basu and MacDonald 2007; to name a few), but not so much has been written on the experience of anthropologists as curators. Yet many anthropologists have worked as curators or have organized exhibits, not just in ethnographic museums, but also in contemporary art settings. Meanwhile, curators in the last decades have reached great pre-eminence in the art world, becoming leading figures in art discourse. Some of them have used anthropology and ethnography as a central inspiration of their work. This double movement opens an interesting space of exchange that so far has been only partially explored. The objective of this volume is to bring together the experience of anthropologists who have been involved in different curatorial projects and have reflected upon the relations between curation, anthropology and ethnography. How does the practice of curation help anthropologists rethink their practice, their work and the concerns of contemporary anthropology? This is the central question of this book. But perhaps, before going further, we could start by the opposite end: the curator as ethnographer.

## The curator as ethnographer

The renowned contemporary art curator Okwui Enwezor formulated the analogy in these terms:

In his own hunt for art, might the travel of the curator – in which he scours the global scenes of contemporary art in search of artistic forms and signs through their

various embodiments in objects, systems, structures, images and concepts - be propelled by [a] similar sense of intellectual vertigo that afflicts the ethnographer? Is the curator a co-traveller with the ethnographer in the same procedures of contact and exploration? What distinguishes the practices of curatorial fieldwork from those of ethnography? In the course of this process, it seems even clearer that the path of curatorial fieldwork, while lacking the certainties of the ethnographic discipline, nevertheless shares in some measure a fascination for the tenuous and speculative; the psychic and the spiritual; the cognitive and the symbolic. Like the ethnographer, the contemporary curator is a creature of wanderlust, except in the present instant, the path begins from a series of detours, disorientations and disarticulations of cultural geographies that are being remapped in the face of rapid global reconfigurations. How does the work of contemporary curating engage with this process of cartographic disorientation? In the last half-century, increased mobility and migration have forced the revision of the rules of proximity, eroding cultural borders, exacerbating the relationship between guests and hosts. Rather than practices of good neighbourliness and shared space, greater proximity - that is to say active, unceasing contact between different cultural communities - have instead led to spatial and temporal disjunctions. This means that contemporary societies need to define how to manage conflict, live with cultural dissent within conditions of hostility and non-recognition. (Enwezor 2012: 21)

Enwezor did not identify the ethnographer with the traditional authority figure who provides a totalizing narrative of a particular culture. On the contrary, he departed from the postmodern critique of this authority figure, where the ethnographer is the 'creature of wanderlust' that operates montages between the strange and the familiar, presenting a world of disjuncture and erosion of cultural borders. This text can be found in the catalogue of an exhibit, *Intense Proximity: An Anthology of the Near and the Far* (2012), where ethnographers appeared as these ambiguous but fascinating figures of mediation between collapsing worlds.

Enwezor's proposal has many similarities with Foster's 'artist as ethnographer' (Foster 1995). Foster coined the expression 'the ethnographic turn', pointing to the growing interests of artists in issues of identity and its representation in the 1990s. He described the relationship between artist and anthropologist as a kind of mirroring, in which both look at each other as an image of how they would like to see themselves, as an object of envy. Anthropologists want to be artists, they envy their freedom and openness, while artists want to be anthropologists, they envy their critical perspective and direct access to cultural alterity. However, since these images are a construction of desire, they do not project a very realistic image of the 'other'. If we replace the artist with the curator, will we fall into the same trap?

Why do curators want to be anthropologists – and the other way around? What does this desire tell us about the contemporary situation of both curators and anthropologists?

To address these questions we should start by tracing the outcomes of the 'ethnographic turn' in art practice. The attraction of anthropology for contemporary art practitioners in the 1990s was premised on the assumption that it could offer a

critical take on the politics of representation, a less ethnocentric and elitist approach to art and culture than that of modern art. One could ask if, twenty years later, the art world is less ethnocentric and elitist. The answer would be ambivalent: the international art world is certainly elitist, that is constitutive of its very structure as an institution, but at the same time the number of art centres, festivals, events, biennials and practitioners of contemporary art have multiplied around the globe to an unprecedented level (Gielen 2010), engaging new artists, art worlds and publics. The question would be if this globalization of contemporary art is just an extension and consolidation of its institutional imperialism or, on the contrary, if it could generate structural transformations. In the meantime, 'Decolonization', as we will see in several chapters of this book, has become the mot d'ordre in contemporary art, following and extending the concerns with postcolonialism at the end of the twentieth century. On the other hand, in these two decades, the interest of contemporary art in anthropology has not waned, quite the opposite. Beyond questions of representation and identity, central to Foster's argument, many art projects not only have engaged with 'difference' as a concept, but also have used anthropological methods and theories in their practice. Many participative art projects are based upon fieldwork and are inspired by anthropological theories of exchange to reflect upon social practice (Sansi 2015). In other terms, contemporary art practice not only discusses identity politics, but also enacts forms of social practice using anthropological methods and ideas. Art critics such as Foster (1995) and Bishop (2012) may question the artistic 'quality' of many of these projects, but the 'quantity' cannot be ignored, and hence their social significance: they have become so widespread that they have become a genre in their own right, sometimes called 'social practice' (Sholette 2012).

# Participatory curation

The work of curators has also substantially changed in the last two decades. The multiplication of art spaces and events increasingly requires the figure of the curator as a mediator between the multiple agents involved in the process of producing and showing art: from 'representing' ideas through visual texts, to engaging with publics and communities, producing events, mediating social communities, even creating experimental social situations. The new roles of the art curator are multiple.

Just like in art practice, participatory curation has a big precedent in the 1970s, when new museological practices emerged in community museums and ethnological museums (Vergo 1989). But it would be in the 1990s that these practices would become widespread in contemporary art curation, acquiring a new dimension, from the periphery to the centre of cultural production: participation was not just a marginal form of practice – it became a dominant paradigm. The work of Hans-Ulrich Obrist is a famous example of this turn to participative curation. The project 'Do it' (1992), for example, was premised on the idea of offering 'written instructions by artists, as a point of departure, each of which could be interpreted anew every time they were enacted.' Marcel Duchamp's statement 'art is a game between all people of all periods' is often

quoted as the driving force behind the exhibition. After its initial enactment, 'Do it' has been featured in at least fifty different locations worldwide.

Still, like the 'relational art' forms that they often worked with, these participative projects could be accused of limiting participation to the ephemeral temporalities of the contemporary art world. But we should also make reference to the multiplication of 'durational' approaches to curation (O'Neill and Doherty 2011). Durational approaches start from acknowledging the significance of engaging audiences and encouraging research-based outcomes that are responsive to their specific contexts, audiences and locations over time. This emphasis on long duration, site-specificity and research brings curatorial practice very close to what anthropologists call fieldwork.

## The curatorial laboratory

The contemporary drive to participation is connected to another important aspect: the interest in experimentation in the wider sense of the term, attempting to connect experimental art with other forms of speculative practice, such as experimental science as well as social experiments. Basu and Macdonald pointed to 'exhibition experiments' (2007), in the double sense of the term, as both a tentative curatorial proposal and a laboratory that creates new knowledge. Again, Hans-Ulrich Obrist appears as a precedent to this development, with the *Laboratorium* show (Obrist and Vanderlinden 2001), whose ambition was to stage the relations between scientists, artists, dancers and writers. The objective was to open up spaces of dialogue, not from a central institution that interpellates its subjects, but between the different collectives themselves. Thus the activities of each group were opened up for the others to see and question: the artists were invited to the scientific laboratories, the scientists to the process of artistic production. The museum itself shifted its spaces, displacing the museum offices to the exhibition area for all the public to see.

The collaborations between art, science and social practice have become widespread in recent decades. Inspired by authors in science and technology studies, such as Rheinberger (1997) and Latour (2005), these collaborations are premised on the notion that, in spite of their radically different cultures, experiments in science, art and politics have one point in common: they do not only attempt to represent reality, but also to make it concrete, to perform it. Furthermore, experimentation is defined essentially as a participative event; departing from the model of the traditional scientific laboratory as a closed space, in which humans might control nature in order to better understand it, contemporary approaches define experimentation as a social process rather than a knowledge site (Corsín Jiménez 2013: 2). The new 'collective experiments' for Latour are happening outside the traditional laboratories – on us, with us, we are all participating in them (Latour 2005).

In this context, the borders between scientific, artistic and social experimentation are becoming blurred. This expanded model of experimentation would not be based solely on scientific research labs, but also on open software, design labs, media labs (Rabinow et al. 2018) and artistic collaborative practices in general (Marcus 2010).

Corsín and Estalella underscore the centrality of hospitality in this model, as opposed to the radical strangeness and separation between objects and subjects of the traditional 'pure' science lab (Corsín and Estalella 2010).

What would be the role of the curator in these new 'laboratories'? More than a doorkeeper in charge of a closed space, the curator would appear as a mediator whose role it is to facilitate collaboration and experimentation, the exchange between the different actors involved in the experimental space. Obrist again exemplifies this shift: he notes that the term curator comes from the Latin *curare*, meaning taking care, curing, helping, rather than doorkeeping (Obrist 2014).

## The anthropologist as curator

The relationship of the ethnographer with the curator can be seen precisely from the prism of this interest in experimentation. So far, I have talked about how a curator can be seen as an ethnographer. But what about the anthropologist as curator? That question has started to be addressed by some anthropologists in recent years. In The Incurable-Image: Curating Post-Mexican Film and Media Arts (2016), Tarik Elhaik, who is himself a film curator and anthropologist, starts from this parallelism: at the same time that we see curatorial work that is increasingly similar to what anthropologists call fieldwork, anthropologists start to question what constitutes this 'work' of ethnography. In what they have defined as the 'anthropology of the contemporary', Rabinow et al. (2008) propose notions such as 'assemblage-work' to replace 'field-work'. The object of study of anthropology is no longer a given singular community, located in a singular space for a particular time, but an assemblage of different parts: people, places, objects, concepts and agencies of different sorts that constitute contemporary assemblages. This notion of assemblage-work is related to Marcus's para-site (2000) participatory spaces where multiple divergent agents and agencies discursively interact across geographic, temporal and disciplinary boundaries. The model for the para-site would be the design lab, as an open process that does not just represent the world as it is, but produces and tests new experimental objects. The anthropologist as curator would have the role of mediator in the production of these experimental objects.

One of the examples used by Elhaik is the curatorial collective Teratoma, who made a remontage of Eisensteins's *Que Viva México!* (1931–32) and then a recreation of its filming at its specific site, Tetlapayac. As a curator himself, Elhaik organized a programme of films, 'Yo soy Mexico', which were dealing with of the 'post-Mexican' condition in similar ways to Teratoma's project, adding recursive layers to this experimental object.

Nikola Ssorin-Chaikov's proposal of 'ethnographic conceptualism' starts, like Elhaik, from a questioning of traditional notions of fieldwork. For Ssorin-Chaikov, fieldwork does not only represent reality but also is a part of its fabrication; it is a form of social intervention. Ethnographic conceptualism proposes to use the performative and conceptual methods of contemporary art as ethnographic methods. In 2006, Ssorin-Chaikov curated an exhibition, *Gifts to Soviet Leaders*, at the Kremlin

Museum of Moscow. This exhibition displayed the presents given to former Soviet leaders. But the curators gave great importance to the comments in the exhibition's visitors' book, which offered all possible views across the political spectrum as well as reflections on the values and meanings of the objects displayed – and which eventually became a part of the exhibit. For the curators, the exhibition was both an end and a means of research, a post-Soviet artefact and a tool in the ethnography of post-Soviet Moscow; the exhibition both displayed and performed post-socialist society. In this case, ethnographic conceptualism was an ethnographic research and a conceptualist depiction of this exhibition's organizational infrastructure (Ssorin-Chaikov 2013: 7–8).

We could say that the notion of the anthropologist as curator incorporates elements of the approaches we have seen before, like the 'montage' of Enwezor and the participatory laboratory of some of Obrist's projects. But the question returns. What distinguishes curatorial work from ethnographic work? If we insist on the mediations, on the relations, on the connections, then the specificity of these different kinds of work is diluted. Does that mean that their value is also diluted? Some of the chapters in this book express concern with this possibility. Is there a point in maintaining these distinctions, in detaching the curator from the ethnographer? And if 'contemporary societies need to define how to manage conflict' and 'live with cultural dissensus', as Enwezor says, are either the curator or the ethnographer well placed to manage this conflict?

## The expanded field of the curatorial

At this point we need to consider in wider terms what are we defining as curation. The literature on the 'curatorial' in the last few years has been very prolific (Balzer 2015; Bismarck et al. 2012; Lind 2012; Martinon 2013; Obrist 2014; O'Neill 2012; Smith 2012). The 'curator' has become an all-encompassing term: the curator as everything else (the curator as ethnographer, the curator as mediator and so on). This 'expanded field' of the curatorial is built upon the expanded field of art. As modern and contemporary art rejected the academy and professionalism, and embraced experimentation, chance and deskilling, artists started to take upon themselves many different roles: travellers, scientists, narrators, thinkers, ethnographers, social mediators, political agitators, and so on. The curator is in the same puzzle as the contemporary artist, whose practice is always something more and something other than art. What would be the difference between artist and curator then? For Irit Rogoff (2013) the problem of the expanded mode of art is that it appears simply as a celebration of multiplicity, confusing infinite expansion of the museum with inclusion and compensation. For Rogoff, rather than just a celebration of multiplicity, what is interesting about this expanding field is that it manifests an epistemological crisis, and the curatorial would be in a privileged position to address it. The role of the curatorial would be to bring together knowledge, sensibilities and insights, assembling them together and enacting the event of knowledge rather than illustrating them (Rogoff 2013: 43).

But again, who gives to the curator this privileged position of bringing others together? Or better, what allows this encounter to happen? What is behind this 'epistemological crisis'? The privileged position of the curator may be just a sign of our current mode of production, Carolyn Christov-Bakargiey, the artistic director of 'Documenta X', said that 'the curator is the most emblematic worker of the cognitive age' (Balzer 2015: 3), an age based in the production of discourse, values, relations. The omnipresent figure of the curator as a mediator simultaneously occupies multiple roles: author, interpreter, communicator, administrator, impresario, diplomat, but in any of these roles, the curator does not really produce anything per se, but writes narratives, exchanges information, builds relations, generates value. At the same time the role of curator is deprofessionalized: many 'star' curators are not professionally trained as such, while, paradoxically, curatorship courses proliferate. But curators do more than curating art: they delocalize exhibits, research, interview, debate, do ethnography, multiply events. All these different activities are developed without necessarily being professionally trained in these tasks, like in the case of contemporary artists that approach different media and tasks without being trained in them . But in opposition to or separation from the contemporary artist, the curator cannot embrace chance and process as method so explicitly; the curator has to provide the discourse that brings things together and has to make ends meet. In these terms, curators may indeed be the model for the workers of the cognitive age, as Christov-Bakargiev says, workers that produce contents, discourses and values, because they are the ones with the responsibility of turning an art event into accountable value. The role of the curator would be to bring to light the project beyond the art event: the project in the terms of Boltanksi and Chiapello, as a stabilization of processes and connections, in order to make them irreversible, a pocket of accumulation that can be justified, that generates value (Boltanski and Chiapello 2005: 105).

In these terms the figure of the curator appears closer to that of a manager, a manager of relations, discourses and aesthetic value, but a manager nonetheless. It may seem that we are very far from the ethnographer who would appear to be a more romantic or critical figure. But really? Isn't the task of the ethnographer to manage difference, to mediate? Can the ethnographer learn from the managing skills developed by curators, in terms of the micropolitics of mediating between institutions, communities and all kinds of different agents? Some authors in this volume point in this direction.

These are very broad questions, indeed. But the proposal of this book is to ask these questions openly and without prejudice. The academic reaction to these comparisons, to the 'expanded field' of art and curatorship, for example, is often built on arguments of purity and detachment (Sansi and Strathern 2016). By separating ourselves from the flow, or the avalanche of cognitive capitalism embodied by the curator, anthropologists and other academics aspire to maintain a critical distance instead of getting their hands dirty in the network of value relations. Is this detachment indeed possible? This volume does not intend to simply celebrate interdisciplinarity and experimentation, but nor are we interested in withdrawing from thinking what anthropology can become beyond its traditional academic fences. On the contrary, we think that these exchanges, these experiments are interesting, provoking thought, reactively, about

what constitutes the work of ethnography and anthropology in general terms. But our aim is not to build yet another theory of the 'curatorial' or to propose a 'curatorial turn' in anthropology. Our objective is much more modest: it is to take a close look at the experience of anthropologists who have worked as curators, describing their working processes ethnographically, their intellectual and material constraints, the very detail of their infrastructures and processes, starting with the anecdotes. These descriptions can be crucial in order to think together where this relationship can take us, which new perspectives can be opened up.

## The chapters

The purpose of this book is precisely to address all these questions from a variety of viewpoints, examples and experiences. In 2016, a workshop on the 'Anthropologist as curator' was held at the Pirelli Hangar Bicocca art centre in Milan as part of the larger European Association of Social Anthropologists (EASA) conference. Out of our discussion several questions emerged: the range of forms of curation; the different media; the relation between exhibitions and archives; the forms of participation and mediation, and the politics of curatorship; the position of the academic anthropologist in regard to these forms of mediation; the long-standing, contentious history of anthropological practices of curation, before the recent interest of contemporary art curators; and the figure of the 'curator' as a model of and model for the cultural worker, and the worker in general, in our times. The workshop produced a landscape that, at that time, we were only able to start mapping; and the idea for this edited volume emerged at that event. Some of the contributions to this volume are a result of that workshop and some have been added in the ongoing discussion that followed. The purpose of the book is to bring together different anthropologists who have worked as curators in a contemporary art context, to address these issues from their experience.

After this introduction, Chapters 2 and 3 build up the frame of the general discussion of the book from different points of view. Chapter 2 is a conversation between Tarek Elhaik and George Marcus. The point of departure is the 'writing culture' debate of the 1980s, led by Marcus among others, and the legacy of its call for experimental methods. From there, the two authors discuss the possibility of developing new forms of anthropological practice beyond traditional fieldwork, towards more experimental models of research, such as Marcus's notion of the 'para-site' and Elhaik's book, The Incurable-Image (2016), in which Elhaik explores the parallelism between curatorship and ethnography. Elhaik tentatively proposes the curatorial as a third mode of anthropological work: after the 'comparative method' of nineteenthcentury evolutionism, and the site-specific 'ethnographic method' of twentiethcentury cultural relativists, might curation emerge as a new method for the twentyfirst century? For Elhaik, curation reframes the Boasian critique of the comparative method: with curation, the anthropological problem shifts from a concern with the comparison of facts and objects from different places to 'a concern with assembling a wilder kind of difference that is far from being whimsical' (Elhaik, Chapter 2, this volume). Curation as practice appears also in contrast to the classical Boasian and

Malinowskian 'ethnographic method' understood as a direct representation of a single site, a 'field', precisely because curation would be concerned with the assemblage of different elements rather than the representation of a single field. The practice of curation can be seen, in these terms, as a method that corresponds to the new kinds of sites that anthropologists work with, as described by Marcus, characterized by multiplicity (the multisite), excess and ambiguity between the object and the subject of representation (the para-site).

However, Elhaik and Marcus point out that they are not proposing yet another 'turn'. The engagement with curation continues the invitation to experimentation of previous generations of anthropologists, to propose new modes of inhabiting the world and using their discipline, and to work playfully in terms of montage, design and assemblage, understanding anthropology as a 'minor science', an empirical mode of thinking that deterritorializes conventional methods and categories. Then, like now, these experimental, playful and tentative proposals met with resistance, which Elhaik identifies with the current call of ontologically oriented anthropologists for a 'perpetual decolonization'. This apparently revolutionary call may, paradoxically, question the legitimacy of experimentation, by putting the emphasis back on representation.

This very paradox of representation is central to the chapter that follows. Chapter 3, 'The recursivity of the curatorial' by Jonas Tinius and Sharon Macdonald, addresses one of the issues discussed in this introduction, the expanded field of curatorship. Confronting the notion of the curator as an all-encompassing mediator, they argue that there are multiple forms of curation that cannot be accounted for by this emergent model, in particular the traditional model of the professional curator as a museum-based caretaker of objects. The authors start from a clear position of *not desiring* to become the other – appreciating the proximity, but without blurring the boundaries (and thus also the differences) between the curator and the anthropologist.

Tinius and Macdonald are working on the project Making Differences in Berlin: Museums and Heritage in the 21st Century in collaboration with museums, where they struggle to maintain their autonomy as anthropologists. Macdonald addresses the awkward negotiation of her position as a researcher in a context where her participation takes different forms, from being a formal member of an advisory board to a more informal role as 'accompanying' or 'following' the process of exhibition-making, in a context where 'participation' and 'transparency' are the watchwords. Tinius, on the other hand, presents a collaborative project with the curator Bonaventure Soh Bejeng Ndikung, entitled 'Relexification Dialogues', a set of conversations around concepts that address the relation between anthropology and curation. The aim of these dialogues is not to write a dictionary, but to experiment with a long-term exchange and joint recalibration of perspectives. One of these concepts is 'recursivity', that is, in very general terms, the quality of a figure that draws upon itself. A mirror reflecting a mirror reflecting a mirror would be an iconic example of recursivity. The argument of the recursive emerges in this context to describe the process of mutual mirroring of anthropology and curation: not only does curation mirror anthropology, but, as Tinius realized, his fieldwork also mirrors in style and content some of the models and formats of curation. Could this process of mutual reflection become 'the staging ground for the development of an idea' (Rogoff 2013:16)? More than a dialogue between anthropology and curation, could it be the enactment of an event of knowledge? The authors are uncertain about this possibility. What if rather than a mirror reflecting a mirror, the image of recursion, the mirrors are broken, as Ndikung says? What if the mirrors are turned back to each other and they only reflect themselves, as in Foster's 'ethnographer's envy'? The fear of being absorbed by the other, of getting lost in the mirror reflections, of being trapped and losing agency, authority, representation, is present in this and other chapters in this volume. The description of the relation between art and anthropology as an 'uneven hermeneutics' (Schneider 2018), referenced in this chapter and also in Flynn's chapter in this volume, starts from an ontology of representation, where they each occupy clearly delineated subject positions, and one may fear being absorbed, incorporated or cancelled by the other. But hermeneutics, interpretation, dialogue and reflexivity, are not the same thing as recursivity. The recursive is not an exchange between two given subjects, but a self-constitutive relation. Recursivity prefigures a relational ontology, where relations take precedence over entities (Sansi 2015). If we discuss the relation between art and anthropology in terms of recursivity, we are not introducing a dialogue between given subjects, but the prefiguration of a third subject, beyond the 'representation' of anthropology and/or art; we project the relation towards a prefigured future, rather than representing a given past.

On the other hand, the question of the past, of representation, cannot be easily dismissed, but is recurrent (if not necessarily recursive!) in recent years in the form of the debate on decolonization, as many authors in this book demonstrate. Even if the art world has become relatively more globalized, perhaps we are not very far from the identity politics that Foster was discussing in the 1990s as a source for the 'ethnographic turn'. For example, in his chapter in this volume, Flynn proposes to think in terms of a redistribution of the sensible, after Rancière (2004) and Strohm (2012), to question *who* discusses representation and identity (Flynn, this volume). And yet, for Rancière, the distribution of the sensible that aesthetics proposes is precisely built in contraposition to the regime of representation. The task of art in the aesthetic regime for Rancière would be to enact new subjects, rather than represent the given world more or less fairly. The open question at this point would be whether the ongoing debates on representation, which still seem inevitable in the second decade of the twenty-first century, may in fact be in contradiction with the claims to experimentation and prefiguration in anthropology and art.

The two chapters that follow explicitly engage with these questions of representation. Chapters 4 and 5 are written by anthropologists Silvia Forni and Ivan Bargna, who have both worked in ethnographic museums on African art and contemporary art projects. Building on their experience as curators they reflect upon how contemporary art curation and anthropology have influenced each other. Forni is a curator at the Royal Ontario Museum, and her chapter addresses the complicated history of its African collections. The exhibit *Into the Heart of Africa*, in 1989, proposed an experimental reading of this collection, highly influenced by the then current (1980s) postmodern critiques of the museum. However, the exhibit faced the backlash of the African-Canadian community that understood the exhibition as an expression of liberal white privilege. A quarter of a century later, the museum has apologized for this exhibit and proposed to develop a long-term, multi-platform project *Of Africa*, led by Forni, the

art historian Julie Crooks and the curator Dominique Fontaine. *On Africa*, like *Into the Heart of Africa*, proposed to challenge the traditional strategies of museum display in ethnographic museums, but in a very different manner: this time around, counting on the active collaboration of the African-Canadian community.

Bargna has worked both in participatory art projects and with ethnographic collections, and in Chapter 5 he discusses some of his curatorial projects, in particular the exhibit *Wonders of Africa: African Art in Italian Collections* (Bargna 2012), where he had the collaboration of artist Stefano Arienti. For Bargna there is a fundamental difference between anthropological and contemporary art curation: 'unlike curatorship in the world of contemporary art, which tends to suck the world inward towards the exhibition space, anthropological ethnography takes the exhibition space out into the world, making of it a space for fieldwork, tracing an unbroken web of cross-references between interior and exterior' (Bargna, this volume). In these terms, the anthropologist sees the exhibition not as a final outcome but as a research space.

Chapter 6 presents the trajectory of the curatorial collective Ethnographic Terminalia in their own terms. The collective was formed in 2009 to organize a parallel space of exhibition during the American Anthropological Association (AAA) meetings. During the last decade, Ethnographic Terminalia has experimented with different formats. In this chapter they describe their exhibitions as prototypes (Boyer 2011): open processes where the act of curation stands as a kind of performance. Particularly interesting in the case of Ethnographic Terminalia is the relationship between the curators and the public: the public for the AAA events were, ultimately, the colleagues of the curators, anthropologists like themselves, and hence the 'participatory' feedback, the 'recursive' loop, between the public and the curator has a very specific meaning.

Chapters 7 and 8 are authored by Judith Winter and Jennifer Clarke respectively, both researchers on the project *Knowing from the Inside: Anthropology, Art, Architecture and Design* (2013–2018), led by Timothy Ingold at the University of Aberdeen, UK. One of the main objectives of the project has been to foster working relations between anthropologists, artists, architects and designers, and produce outcomes that are not limited to written texts but include the production of exhibitions and installations. Winter has a long-standing career as a curator in different contexts. Her chapter describes how the figure of the contemporary curator emerged in a context of practice, rather than as a clearly delimited academic figure. The contemporary art curator, in opposition to the classical keeper of collections, carries out a critical practice and mediates a lived experience; and for Winter, in these terms, the common discursive space between contemporary art and anthropology is self-explanatory. Drawing from the thought of Roy Wagner and Maria Lind, Winter addresses anthropology and art curation as digressive and speculative practices, rather than academic knowledge with the task of containing and contextualizing life.

Clarke, on the other hand, is trained as an anthropologist. In her chapter, Clarke focuses on two exhibitions in which she has participated, within her larger research project in *Knowing from the inside*, which emphasized the potential of anthropology working *with* art: producing research not only in the form of academic output, but with artistic practice. This 'working with' operates in an ambiguous terrain that, for Clarke, has had uneven results, in some cases more successful than others. In the chapter,

Clarke points out what she learned about artistic practice as a professional practice, with its explicit and implicit assumptions, and the conflicts and contradictions she encountered in working with professional artists and curators, precisely because her project operated from an ambivalent terrain, in terms not only of her position but also of its final results. Clarke has come to think of art anthropology and curation as an 'ecology of *practices*', a 'mode of questioning' that situates the relevance and limits of one practice in relation to the others, considering how knowledge gleaned from one field might be brought to bear on others (Stengers 2005; Clarke, this volume).

The notion of an ecology of practices is interesting. Stengers does not defend the 'preservation' of practices in their uniqueness and pristine autonomy ('art' or 'anthropology'), placing them above the risk of decreasing differentiation, a general 'expanded' model of practice, capitalist management or 'the curatorial'. An ecology of practices is not about describing different practices as they are, but as they might become in relation to each other. To think in terms of this ecology in relations means thinking in terms of mutually constitutive and interdependent differences. In these terms, as Clarke says, divergent practices 'impinge upon' one another, a relational approach not unlike Marcus's (2008) (Clarke, this volume).

Chapters 9 to 12 address different fields, forms and contexts of curation that exceed the conventional framework of the fine arts, from street art to film and sound. Starting with Rafael Schacter, an anthropologist and contemporary art curator, who has worked in particular with graffiti and street art, forms of practice that are often placed outside the sphere of contemporary art and that resist being exhibited and curated in conventional ways. From his initial, collaborative curatorial work with street artists, Schacter has moved to work as a curator in a wider field of contemporary practice. In this process, he has learned to work on exhibitions not just as a method to enable his research, but as a means of generating research.

In Chapter 10, anthropologist Alex Flynn emphasizes some interesting parallelisms and differences between ethnography and curatorial practice. On one hand, Flynn discusses the 'presentialism' of some forms of curatorial practice, in which the curator accompanies the practice of artists well beyond the exhibition space, in a shared life that he compares with ethnography. On the other hand Flynn contrasts ethnography with expography, meaning exhibition design. Working on 'expography' involves a number of material, practical and administrative concerns that may not be apparent in ethnography: from wide-ranging questions such as 'how to occupy a space?' to apparently insignificant decisions, like where to exhibit - on a table, floor or wall? The curatorial process is, in this plain sense, 'three-dimensional', materialized, grounded, in ways that ethnographic practice hardly considers. Although there are important points of encounter between the curatorial and anthropological processes with regard to conducting research, it is on the detail of how this research is carried out and aestheticized, materialized, situated that we must focus. Engaging with curatorial practice in this horizontal manner, thinking through infrastructures, can facilitate a rethinking of anthropological processes of knowledge production.

The final two chapters address the extension of practices and theories of curation to other media. In Chapter 11, 'Between automation and agency', Theunissen and Favero argue that the role of the visual researcher is increasingly being defined as a form of

curation. At a time when more and more people produce, edit and distribute images, the visual researcher has become a 'curator' of these ready-made projects, rather than a 'film director' or 'producer'. This extension of the practice of curation beyond the realm of visual arts towards all practices of image production, moving or still, is recursively redefining the practice of both fine art curators and visual anthropologists in the conventional sense. But, on the other hand, they also note that overall, a great deal of the curatorial 'labour' is automated and algorithm-driven. In these terms, we should question the extent to which the digital infrastructures on which we rely do in fact also 'participate' in, and even co-create the material that we, as researchers, collect and exhibit.

Finally, in the last chapter, Noel Lobley illustrates what could be an anthropology of sound curation, exploring a series of ongoing curation projects designed to link major ethnographic collections from sub-Saharan Africa with contemporary local and international artists and communities.

All these different chapters show the multiple ways in which curatorial practice, ethnography and anthropology are intertwined today; the different forms of collaboration, conjunction, mimesis, 'uneven hermeneutics', reversibility and recursivity, bringing into question not only the limits of the 'curatorial', but also the transformations of anthropological practice in the last few decades. In these terms, the objective of this book is not only to make a contribution to the literature on the relations between art and anthropology, but also to make a wider contribution to the rethinking of what the labour of anthropology has become, and how it can help to reshape and recast other forms of practice in the contemporary world. The extensive transformations that the work and status of the curator has undergone in recent decades and its extension to other many fields, including anthropology, can help anthropologists rethink the future of their discipline, not just in terms of the new theories and 'turns' that may emerge, but in particular how these changes are intimately connected to the kind of work we do, the infrastructure of our labour.

Is the figure of the curator an opportunity for anthropologists to exit the shambles of the institutional crisis of academia? It would be limiting and also contradictory to see it in these terms. On the one hand, it seems to coincide with managerial requirements for justification, because curatorial practice has a wider public repercussion, a wider 'outreach'; but, on the other hand, curatorial practice is difficult to justify in the increasingly bureaucratized hierarchy of academic production as a 'scientific output'.

However, it is also limiting to reject or withdraw from engaging with the 'expanded field' of the curatorial, waiting for the tide to recede, because this is not a passing fad but a significant condition of the contemporary world. In a 'relational' society, where value is measured by the capacity to build networks, establish links and assemble, the only possible, realistic answer is to engage with the network, to plunge into the expanded field, to multiply the relations, rather than withdrawing (Sansi and Strathern 2016).

The different chapters in this book take very different positions in regard to this game of mirror reflections between the anthropologist and the curator: from Elhaik's strong proposal to see curation as a third method for anthropology, to the defence of autonomy of many anthropologists who fear being cannibalized by curation, to more dynamic proposals to define these relations within an ecology of practices. At

a wider, practical level, all the chapters show how working with, on, as, through and even against curators has become part of the work of many anthropologists, simply because ethnography starts from the social practices and discourses it encounters. And if curation has become a keyword for contemporary global society, it has to become a topic of discussion for contemporary ethnography, and also a form of practice through which fieldwork is carried out. Schacter's and Flynn's chapters, among others, show very explicitly how curatorial and ethnographic practice can become intertwined and mutually enlightening.

But more specifically, all the chapters express a concern with the agency of anthropologists, a concern that is a late result of the protracted crisis of representation that we still suffer; from being the self-attributed producers of legitimate representations of the other to becoming just one more agent in an fluid platform of multiple images and discourses. The claim to 'curation' seems to reflect the aspiration to manage this flux, give it a purpose and a value through assemblage and montage. And yet, as Theunissen and Favero show in Chapter 11, the flux of images and discourses that surrounds us is not only overwhelming and difficult to manage but it is also increasingly, *recursively*, self-curated through algorithms. The real challenge, at this point, is not just the 'extended field' of curation but the engagement with this third agent, the self-curating, self-assembling digital infrastructures that surround us. How are we 'participating', 'collaborating', working with this third agent, is probably the most urgent question we should start to address right now.

#### Note

1 http://curatorsintl.org/special-projects/do-it

#### References

Balzer, David (2015), Curationism: How Curating Took Over the Art World - And Everything Else, London: Pluto Press.

Bargna, Ivan (2012), Wonders of Africa, African Art in Italian Collections, Milan: Silvana Editoriale.

Basu, P. and S. MacDonald (2007), Exhibition Experiments, London: Blackwell.Bishop, Claire (2012), Artificial Hells: Participatory Art and the Politics of Spectatorship, London and New York: Verso.

Bismarck, Beatrice von Jörn Schafaff and Thomas Weski, eds. (2012), *Cultures of the Curatorial*, Berlin: Stenberg Press.

Boltanski, L. and E. Chiapello (2005), The New Spirit of Capitalism, London: Verso.
Boyer, Dominic (2011), 'A Gallery of Prototypes: Ethnographic Terminalia 2010, Curated by Craig Campbell, Fiona P. McDonald, Maria Brodine, Kate Hennessy, Trudi Lynn Smith, Stephanie Takaragawa', Visual Anthropology Review, 27 (1): 94–6.

Clifford, James (1997), Routes: Travel and Transformation in the Late Twentieth Century, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

- Corsín Jiménez, A. (2013), 'Introduction: The Prototype: More Than Many and Less Than One', *Journal of Cultural Economy*, 7 (4): 381–98.
- Corsín Jiménez, A. and A. Estalella (2010), 'The Prototype: A Sociology of Abeyance', Available online: http://limn.it/issue/00/ (accessed 29 July 2019).
- Edwards, E., C. Gosden and R. Phillips, eds. (2006), *Sensible Objects: Colonialism, Museums and Material Culture*, London: Bloomsbury.
- Elhaik, T. (2016), *The Incurable-Image: Curating Post-Mexican Film and Media Arts*, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
- Enwezor, O., ed. (2012), Intense Proximity: An Anthology of the Near and the Far [La Triennale 2012], Paris: Artlys.
- Foster, H. (1995), 'The Artist as Ethnographer?' in G. Marcus and F. Myer (eds), *The Traffic in Culture: Refiguring Art and Anthropology*, Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Gell, A. (1996), 'Vogel's Net: Traps as Artworks and Artworks as Traps', *Journal of Material Culture*, 1 (1): 15–38.
- Gielen, P. (2010), The Murmuring of the Artistic Multitude: Global Art, Memory and Post-Fordism, Amsterdam: Valiz.
- Karp, I. and S. Levine, eds. (1991), *Exhibiting Cultures: The Poetics and Politics of Museum Display*, Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
- Karp, I. and C. Kratz (2007), Frictions: Public Cultures / Global Transformations, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, Barbara (1998), *Destination Culture: Tourism, Museums, and Heritage*, Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Latour, Bruno (2005), *Making Things Public: Atmospheres of Democracy*, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Lind, M., ed. (2012), Performing the Curatorial Within and Beyond Art, Berlin: Sternberg Press
- Lonetree, Amy (2012), *Decolonizing Museums: Representing Native America in National and Tribal Museums*, Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
- Marcus, G. E., ed. (2000), *Para-sites: A Casebook against Cynical Reason*, Vol. 7, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Marcus, George (2010), 'Contemporary Fieldwork Aesthetics in Art and Anthropology: Experiments in Collaboration and Intervention', *Visual Anthropology*, 23: 263–77.
- Martinon, Jean-Paul, ed. (2013), *The Curatorial: A Philosophy of Curating*, 41–8, London: Bloomsbury.
- Obrist, H. U. (2014), Ways of Curating, London: Macmillan.
- Obrist, H.-U. and Vanderlinden, B. (2001), Laboratorium, Cologne: DuMont.
- O'Neill, P. (2012), The Culture of Curating and the Curating of Culture(s), Cambridge, MA: MIT.
- O'Neill, P. and C. Doherty, eds. (2011), Locating the Producers: Durational Approaches to Public Art, Amsterdam: Valiz.
- Rabinow, Paul, George E. Marcus, James D. Faubion and Tobias Rees (2008), *Designs for an Anthropology of the Contemporary*, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Rancière, Jacques (2004), The Politics of Aesthetics: The Distribution of the Sensible, New York: Continuum.
- Rheinberger, H.-J. (1997), *Towards a History of Epistemic Things*, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
- Rogoff, Irit (2013), 'The Expanded Field', in Jean-Paul Martinon (ed.), *The Curatorial: A Philosophy of Curating*, 41–8, London: Bloomsbury.

- Sansi, Roger (2015), Art, Anthropology and the Gift, London: Bloomsbury.
- Sansi, Roger and Marilyn Strathern (2016), 'Art and Anthropology after Relations', *Hau*, 6 (2): 425–39.
- Schneider, A. (2018), 'Between Uneven Hermeneutics and Alterity: The Dialogical Principle in the Art Anthropology Encounter' *Field. A Journal of Socially-engaged Art Criticism*, 11-Fall 2018.
- Schneider, A. and C. Wright, eds. (2005), *Contemporary Art and Anthropology*, Oxford: Berg Publishers.
- Schneider, A. and C. Wright, eds. (2010), *Between Art and Anthropology: Contemporary Ethnographic Practice*, Oxford: Berg.
- Schneider, A. and C. Wright, eds. (2013), *Anthropology and Art Practice*, London: Bloomsbury.
- Sholette, Gregory (2012), 'After OWS: Social Practice Art, Abstraction, and the Limits of the Social', *E-flux Magazine*. Available from: https://www.e-flux.com/journal/31/68204/after-ows-social-practice-art-abstraction-and-the-limits-of-the-social/ (accessed 28 September 2018).
- Smith, Terry (2012), *Thinking Contemporary Curating*, New York: Independent Curators International.
- Ssorin-Chaikov, N. (2013), 'Ethnographic Conceptualism: An Introduction', *Laboratorium*, 5 (2): 5–18.
- Stengers, I. (2005), 'Introductory Notes on an Ecology of Practices', *Cultural Studies Review*, 11 (1): 183–96.
- Strohm, Kiven (2012), 'When Anthropology Meets Contemporary Art Notes for a Politics of Collaboration', *Collaborative Anthropologies*, 5: 98–124.